# Memorize Python

This project is two things.  First, it is a generated `Memorize_Python.json`
file (and media directory) that are used by the
[CrowdAnki](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/1788670778) Anki plugin.  It is
also the code behind the memorizepython.com website.

### How and Why Should I Memorize a Programming Language?

See [this short blog post](./site/why.md) answering the question.

### The `Memorize_Python.json` file

The `Memorize_Python.json` file at the root of this project is actually
generated by the `mp` script.  It needs to be there for CrowdAnki to be able to
easily load it to create a deck.

#### How the `Memorize_Python.json` file works

If you run `./mp compile` it takes the `data/raw` json files and turns them
into notes, then it merges those notes into the
`templates/Memorize_Python.json` file, and outputs the `Memorize_Python.json`
file at the root of this project.  That file is used by
[CrowdAnki](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/1788670778) to make a deck called
"Memorize Python"

### The memorizepython.com website

There's nothing there at the moment, and nothing in here that supports the
website, but that's the future plan.

For now I'm concentrating on the Anki cards first.

### Contributing

This project is *really* early.  I haven't solidified the raw JSON structure,
the `mptools`, etc.  Also, I haven't translated my nearly 1,000 cards into this
new structure, yet.  If you'd like to contribute, please reach out to chat via an
issue, first, so we can talk about what can be stable enough to build on.

All contributions must also be MIT licensed.
